I'm us poet laureate Rita Dove addresses
the National Press Club
that's the c-span 2 program scheduled
next it's a discussion on the
development of the Central Intelligence
Agency in the Truman administration this
session focuses on the years 1947 to
1953 former CIA director Richard Helms
is among the participants
[Music]
the two sessions this morning go on to
the general heading of CIA at work 1947
to 1953 which I presume is his broad and
general a title as we could possibly
have found and therefore almost anything
could be and I thrust will be presented
the first panel this morning has the
subtitle espionage and covert action and
we shall hear first from a man who
clearly does not need any introduction
in this audience ambassador and former
Director of Central Intelligence Richard
Helms the second speaker will be John
ranlo who holds degrees from Christ
Church Oxford at the University of Kent
has written a number of books is most
recently involved in television
documentaries the author of the agency
the rise and decline of the CIA and a
six-part television documentary in
preparation entitled CIA ambassador
Helms you have the floor
good morning I didn't realize when I was
looking into the past and how many
companions of the long march since World
War two we've got to be in my audience
this morning as I look around the room I
can see at least a half a dozen maybe a
dozen who went every inch of the way and
I'm just amazed at our survivability I
noticed yesterday that there was a great
deal of
mentioned from this platform of dates of
various developments to President
Truman's administration as it applied to
the SS you see IG CIA and so forth
Michael Warner I think has done an
admirable job in the book that you have
of reading it read writing a preface
which has in it everything anybody needs
to know about this subject and so in my
remarks I don't intend to deal with any
dates you can put the dates in for
yourself I want to deal more this
morning with the atmosphere that existed
in the town at the time that we're
discussing the SS you see IG CIA period
the SS you people which was the group
that was picked up by C IG and then came
into CIA and its founding were housed in
four temporary buildings along the
reflecting pool underneath the Lincoln
Memorial ugly buildings which were hot
in the summer and cold in the winter
cramped quarters if I've ever seen them
who was occupying these buildings
survivors of World War two some from the
military some from the OSS and a very
diverse group indeed we all seem to
forget that in world war ii if you had
come to the united states and joined the
american military you could very rapidly
become an American citizen so we had
working with us some individuals that
hardly knew the English language and yet
they were extremely valuable in the
period that followed in Europe in Asia
and other places also during the OSS
days a great effort had been made to
recruit linguist from various parts of
the
country and as every historian here
knows Americans are not famous for their
linguistic abilities they'd rather speak
English somehow but we had discovered
that the Mormon missionaries were a
great treasure trove of linguistic
ability and we had been successful
obviously during the war and recruiting
many of them now the other part of the
atmosphere that it's important to
remember is that anybody who had any
uniform after 1945 was trying to get out
of it now that obviously didn't apply to
the regular officers and enlisted men of
the military but after all this was a
pretty much of an army navy and air
force manned at least numerically by a
civilians and they were all getting
their numbers and trying to get out just
as fast as they could so the idea of
trying to keep together a band or a
representative group of intelligence
officers to man something that nobody
had anticipated would ever have any need
to exist was considerable and we had all
of the problems of an intelligence
organization to resolve yes we'd
inherited these things from the SS from
me OSS
but what underpinning did they have in
our government they had almost none
after all the OSS was a figment of
Donovan's imagination which President
Roosevelt by an executive order put into
existence the SSU was just some sort of
a dangly thing that was put together
with the sealing wax and paper and part
of it was passed off to the State
Department as sort of a you know here's
something nice for you and the rest was
put in the War Department and there
wasn't that one of us had ever gotten
here the Pentagon now that it was one
very fortunate thing that happened and I
think this is good to remember by some
extraordinary good fortune
the SSU CIT group had as his first two
bosses general John Magruder
and Colonel William W Quinn these names
seem to have receded into history if you
like but bill Quinn for is still very
much alive well over 80 but still hearty
but they both were very keen
intelligence officers in the United
States Army and they fought a very good
battle to keep us together to keep the
praying mantis from consuming us and
from the other aspects of Washington
where the carnivorous appetite of
chewing up something that's not well
protected is famous everybody knows but
somehow or other they managed to keep
this boat afloat now one of the problems
that came up and rather severely early
on was that it was decided to take Latin
American intelligence away from the
Federal Bureau of Investigation who had
had it during World War two and give it
to the SSU this enraged mr. J Edgar
Hoover but since it was a presidential
order that he had to give it up he
certainly gave it up but grudgingly so
when the SSU took over latin america as
a responsibility they went to the FBI
offices in the various capitals and
found out that every scrap of paper of
any kind had been taken back to
washington by the FBI and there was
nothing there there was no repository of
the things that the FBI had been able to
achieve during World War two or any of
their contacts or knowledge of the area
so this was a rather tough job to
suddenly take on with a slightly
battered group of real stars now
at that point we obviously had to look
around to find some people that knew
something about Latin America and we
were successful in recruiting some of
the FBI agents who had worked down there
one of these agents I remember
particularly educated us particularly me
and how mr. Hoover had become probably
the most successful bureaucratic manager
in the history of the United States and
I will share this with you I don't know
who how many of you have read books
about mr. Hoover but I can assure you he
never went a round of high heels but he
figured out early on that the sensible
thing for a director to do was to be
sure that he was in charge of three
things first there was a division of the
bureau known as Crime Records which was
nothing but a public relations outfit
that reported directly to mr. Hoover the
second thing was that every
congressional aspect reported directly
to mr. Hoover and the agents who had
worked on Capitol Hill wrote their
reports for him and they went directly
to him and the third thing was liaison
with the elements of the executive
branch of the United States government
this even included the White House in
other words mr. Hoover was not going to
have any liaison officers from the White
House or stage or defense or CIA or
anyplace else come and liaison his
office territory his people went to
their office the net result of this was
that every report that every one of
those liaison officers wrote went
directly to mr. Hoover therefore he had
in his hands every day of the year
exactly what was going on around
and who was doing what what they were
saying about the bureau and so forth and
you all know because there aren't very
many children in this audience that the
FBI and his day ran the best public
relations programs on the radio and
later on the television the movies that
you can imagine I mean they were really
captivating now this means that from the
very start the agency and the bureau did
not have exactly what you would call
connubial relationship or conjugal or
anything else but it was finally worked
out over the years as to how we were
going to proceed and with this ups and
it's downs I think probably the country
was pretty well served but there was
nothing that was going to happen that we
could do in the agency to make mr.
Hoover happy about the fact that he
didn't like the existence of the agency
in the first place he didn't like its
people in the second and as far as he
was concerned it was quite unnecessary
all you needed was the bureau I've never
known a man who was quite as successful
as keeping his hand in your pocket as he
was he was constantly pushing for this
or for that or the other thing now let's
not demean the Bureau they do an
extraordinarily good job but their
culture is very different from that of
the CIA or any of its predecessors and
it's very hard for the two to
communicate sometimes on a problem which
is very sensitive either to one or to
the other I remember in the 50s we were
very able to find out about - a man and
a woman who came to the United States as
illegal Soviet agents since the
counterintelligence responsibilities of
the two organizations
ended at the Continental limits of the
United States we turned this case over
the bureau obviously so that they would
meet the people when they arrived they
botched it up so badly that the duo fled
back to Germany before they even found a
permanent residence I don't mention that
as being symptomatic of anything except
the fact that there was a lot to
complain about on both sides and so when
I read in the paper now about the
difficulties over the Ames case know
this surprises me at all with all the
love and affection between directors of
the two organizations that has very
little to do with the fellows that have
to do the work every day of the week I'd
like also at this point to talk a little
bit about counterintelligence this term
has been so abused that I don't think
that many people really understand
anything about it except what's in the
dictionary which means that it's a an
entity a spirit an effort call it what
you will to try and keep foreign agents
from penetrating the organs of the
executive branch of the United States
government but playing the game of
counterintelligence turns out to be very
dicey indeed now I don't belong to the
school that thinks it's a wilderness of
mirrors this rather catchy title which I
don't know it was attributed to Jim
angleton either would he ever use that
title or not but it's quite possible to
get so wound up in this thing that you
never come out at the end of Psych the
Hampton Court maze but on the other hand
there is no conceivable way that one can
make laws regulations do training any
things you like to ensure
that you're never going to be penetrated
we might as well take that as a given
right now there is no way that this can
be done you can put up barriers you can
have badges you can examine bank
accounts you can stand on your head you
can take polygraph tests you can do
anything you like but every once in a
while a fish is trying to swim through
the net and one might as well recognize
that is a fact of life now why don't we
catch these people quicker why aren't
the means of doing this etc well
nobody's discovered what those means are
or what they were but
counterintelligence in the agency
started off with two individuals a very
different character very different
appearance very different attitudes in
these early days of President Truman's
administration one of them was a fellow
named William Harvey who came to us from
the FBI because he had somehow or other
gotten into mr. Hoover's black book not
seriously but enough so mr. Hoover began
to transfer him to places he didn't want
to go so he joined the agency but his
job in the bureau had been that of
dealing with Russian agents in the
United States during World War two
he ran the Elizabeth Bentley case and
several others and he was thoroughly up
to date on what the bureau had in this
general field it was all in his head he
was one of these fellows with an
absolutely fascinating memory that when
he would describe the Bentley case to
you he'd give you the address the time
the moment everything just right off his
head he would sit there by the hour and
talk about it the other one involved was
James angleton whose name is much more
familiar because he stayed with the
agency a lot longer he was trained by
the British in World War two ran double
agents and Italy
for the last year of the war in
conjunction with the British and brought
a very real sense of how
counterintelligence should be run to the
agency so between the two of them
gradually we began to develop a
counterintelligence approach and the
answer to whether it was successful or
not is that the agency was certainly not
penetrated at any level that made any
significant difference until very much
later and I think after Angleton had
left he has been much abused by two
books that have been written I don't
mean to go into that at any great length
but I think that there's a time when a
little balance and some of these things
might be desirable and I know there are
people who dislike him intensely now
here we have two fellows Angleton spare
hunched over academic looking a poet and
Harvey with a big belly right out of the
cornfields of Indiana guns on his hip
swaggering but between the two of them
they somehow had this one thing in
common and that was how to keep Russians
from penetrating the United States
government and they were damn good at
the job and they got this lore going now
you're going to hear a lot about this
before the Ames case is finished but
please keep in mind what I said that
whatever they come up with it's not
going to be foolproof there may be
certain improvements that can be made
but it's an attitudinal thing and all
you have to do is convince a group that
it's not very nice to be spying on your
fellow colleague because you have to
trust him when you're in the field I
pause because that's the way it has to
work it makes it a very difficult thing
for the members of the agency to handle
the members of any community to handle
and don't let us start pointing fingers
in various directions as one's worse
than the other after all the foreign
services had their spies and the FBI is
had its spies and NSA has had its spies
and so forth over time so although the
aims case may be big at the moment it
will simply take its place with some of
the more serious ones that we've had
since World War two
covert action George Kennan was the name
I'm sure known to all of you is really
the man responsible for the
establishment of what was known as the
office of policy coordination and which
was the one endowed with the right to do
covert action and it was President
Truman whom you all remember from
yesterday was the one who got them
started for a time so and OPC had a
difficult time working together two
separate organizations both in the CIA
both operating overseas and with the
tendency to compete for agents for
networks for liaison relationships for
the relations for the State Department
in many respects it was a nightmare
the OSL was small OPC was getting larger
by the moment when the Korean War came
along it really exploded the Oso people
felt that the OPC people were a bunch of
cowboys they were the professionals
these fellows were simply running around
making life difficult overseas when
general Smith wised up to all this and
looked at the administrative problem he
had of putting some general like general
Truscott and Jerr
in charge of these two competing
organizations he recognized pretty
quickly that he had a nightmare on his
hands so was he who decided to merge the
two organizations now that was not an
easy thing to do and there was lots of
turf warfare and there was lots of
undercutting but strangely enough this
came off rather well within a year or
two and then we had what I think was a
much more harder hitting organization
which was tied together shared
experiences and above all did not
compete with each other for the few good
agents that were around congressional
relations the early days of the agency
as far as Capitol Hill were concerned
can only be described as Halcyon we
reported to four Committees of the
Congress Armed Services in the Senate
and House had the oversight but
obviously one had to also report to the
appropriations committees the
Appropriations chairman in the house
when we started out was Clarence Kanin
who used to have the hearings the
agency's budget was just two or three
other representatives present then would
end the session by pointing out very
carefully to the director that he should
not go around talking to a lot of
congressmen because they leaked all the
time that he would take care of the
budget and not to worry about it that
secrecy was all-important in this kind
of activity the same situation existed
in the Senate the contrast is rather
marked in the Senate there was
finally one committee composed of the
chairman of the Armed Services Committee
the chairman of the appropriations
committee and about four other senators
that was it one staffer today for the
Senate Select Committee there are 50
staffers in the house the appropriation
subcommittee had one staffer and the
Armed Services Committee had one staffer
that was it we had hearings the budget
was never hidden from the Congress as
has been charged it was laid out in
minut detail for these gentlemen to
examine but that was back in the days
when powerful committee chairmen ran
both houses of Congress they felt that
this fledgling organization deserved a
chance to get going the Cold War was
ominous and they were behind it so in
1975 came along and all these secrets
were suddenly pulled out by the church
committee there were a lot of people in
the intelligence work who felt that they
had been betrayed in the sense that what
the hell was this all about we'd always
been assured these secrets were going to
be kept but since I heard this with my
own ears this business about secrecy I
share it with you not to make any
particular point because under the
democracy things can change overnight
but simply to tell you the way the
atmosphere was in those days I forgot to
mention when talking about Harvey and
Angleton's they were the ones who
fingered Philby in 1951 Harvey came up
with the fact that Philby was probably a
mole which incidentally for those of you
who are not familiar with the vernacular
of Intel
as a term was invented by john lecarre a
it had no standing in intelligence until
he started writing his books now one
other point I want to make and then I
will quit during this period we had to
take over the entire intelligence
apparatus of the German Wehrmacht which
had been working on the Soviet Union it
was called the friend to Hera asked this
was quite a trick the army took this
over at the after VE Day ran it for a
time but it was recognized in the
Pentagon that this was probably not the
greatest idea for the United States Army
to have on its
to and after much negotiation and talk
back and forth the whole affair was
transferred to the agency this was
obviously a chore of no small
proportions but somehow or other we got
it done and began to control and for
many years in effect ran this
organization the difficulties here of
course you can imagine we had certain
names
the Germans had certain other aims they
were proud these were fine officers of
the ver macht and it was not an easy job
but somehow it was a contained it never
exploded and turned out to be very
useful in the end as far as his Russian
operations were concerned in these days
they were run almost entirely from the
Berlin base we had nobody in Moscow we
had no overhead reconnaissance
occasionally a defector would come along
providing useful information
but it's hard to imagine the blank these
days was that vast continent unknown as
the Soviet Union with various military
operations coming forward showing up
here we had no idea of quantities
contents gradually one by one we got
agents called pop off and Pankowski who
contributed enormous amounts of
information but that was not
satisfactory and it was not until we
developed various kinds of overhead
reconnaissance which the agency can take
full credit
the u2 the sr-71 now that's something
interesting the sr-71 aurochs cars that
was known in the CIA version was flying
in early 1963 to this day it's the
highest performance aircraft United
States Air Force no aircraft has been
built since that anywheres near attains
what this one could do flying at ninety
thousand feet three times the speed
three Mach three fly across from Orlando
Florida to Los Angeles California an
hour and ten minutes I think it's fair
to say in closing that when General
Smith and Allen Dulles took over at the
agency things really started to happen
now that is not my brief this morning to
talk about that but between the two of
them unlikely people to be working on a
common enterprise but nevertheless they
got along reasonably well this is when
the spirit picked up when things began
to really get tightly organized and the
agency took off for the ensuing period
of the Cold War
I want to conclude this talk by
observing that since I was privileged to
be present at the onset of the Cold War
as well as at its conclusion I would
like to voice the hope that we can do as
good a job of dismantling its particular
apparatus as President Truman did of
constructing it in the first place
transition periods like the one we're in
transition periods in a democracy have a
tendency to be somewhat disorderly since
public opinion is diffuse diverse and
divided where do we want ahead and how
do we get there but once consideration
should be kept in mind and firmly so
great technological breakthroughs
spawned by the urgency of war hot or
cold
do not have behind them the same driving
force in peacetime therefore let us be
careful not to destroy what we already
have by an excess of zeal to return to
budgets dedicated solely to social
issues today I am thinking particularly
of the marvelous photographic satellites
devised and designed by a scientists of
the Central Intelligence Agency such
inventions may not have been part of mr.
Truman's dream for the CIA he founded
but they turned out to be the solution
to the paramount intelligence enigma of
the Cold War Soviet military strength
and what it entailed they still serve an
essential intelligence purpose today and
every day and they will for long times
to come thank you
yes thank you I shall be echoing quite a
lot I think of what we've heard from
dick Helms and some of what we heard
yesterday but what I'm going to try to
do is put some sort of historical
perspective on the on the period 47:52
of the Truman presidency era of the CIA
David McCullough and his biography of
Truman mentions the agency five times
992 pages he concludes as Cassandra
reminded us that Tumen never expected
the CIA to become what it did I should
say right away that it is doubtful if
Truman or anyone else had any clear idea
of how the CIA would turn out in the
late 1940s great institutions work out
their own destinies in relations to the
societies that surround and supply them
espionage and operations for example
took time to gear up so it is not
surprising that people might have been
surprised by later activity in those
areas it took time because America had
not yet worked out how it would conduct
the Cold War and did not want to imagine
itself doing so I think therefore it's
worth having a look at the nature of the
age when the CIA came into being 1945 to
1950 was a period of particular tension
both about the immediate present and the
future on the 3rd of November 1947 John
G Winant who had been ambassador to
Britain during the war committed suicide
in general despair at the future of the
world on that day Lenin's seizure of
power in 1917 was closer in time than
john f kennedy's assassination is to us
today Winant was followed sixteen months
later by Jim Forrestal the who committed
suicide
similar reasons a band of savage and
cranky conspirators who had seized
Russia looked as if they were taking
over the world with the Korean War the
age was simultaneously defined as Soviet
American polarization and was so
institutionalized for the next 40 years
until the collapse of the Soviet Union
so at the moment of the agency's coming
into being in 1947 nobody knew what
shape it would have because nobody knew
the shape the unformed world would
actually have at the highest levels in
Washington for example was thought that
a third world war might actually break
out 1952 was considered to be the most
likely year for this to happen there's
the famous telegram from Lucius clay in
Germany 5th of March 1948 to give a date
then he declared that he thought that
war with the Soviets might come with
dramatic suddenness 11 days later the
young CIA said in an estimate that it
did not think that war would start would
start within the next 60 days early
agency reports and estimates are
peppered with headings such as
assessment of a country's war potential
and preparedness for war the level of
tension implicit in general clays
expectations and the agency's principled
analytical concerns simply reflected the
period the Korean War finally
conditioned and began giving clear shape
to the age so we have two stages the
creation period from 1945 and then the
shaping period beginning in 1950 with
the Korean War
first the creation period there was a
great sense of rethinking America's
place in the world after 1945 in 1947
the agency was formed in what amounted
to a Second Industrial Revolution where
developments were accelerated in the
previous ten years radar the jet engine
supersonic aircraft and supersonic
guided missiles the atom bomb into
intercontinental aircraft and rockets
the backpack radio plastic photocopiers
nylon computers had all come into being
immediate past history was all dove
the Russian Revolution of 1917 more
accurately a coup d'etat had brought
home the significance of long-range
covert penetration subversion and
organization the mindset of politicians
and of the people who form the agency
was shaped by their experience in World
War two most directly by the shock of
Pearl Harbor the 1939 nazi-soviet pact
also had a devastating impact on this
first National Intelligence generation
and they sought not to repeat American
habits of improvisation and instead
carefully to plan responses a high
proportion of young agency people had
taken heavy personal risks during the
war they knew horror espionage and
operations to keep peace seemed as
seemed an infinitely preferable
alternative into the early 1950s it was
not clear that containment would succeed
but to these young men and women
intelligence was akin to Lawrence of
Arabia type work in the developed world
brave sophisticated and above all
economical of life no more pearl harbors
was the cry after 1945 and was at the
heart of the planning and establishment
of the CIA as an agency of armed peace
world war 2 had seen the United States
encountered totality realism without
real mastery of intelligence it was
followed immediately by a new world of
permanent struggle with no clear limits
and unknown but rightly feared
consequences attacked attaching two
actions large and small for almost two
years after the end of the war
communists shared power in Belgium
France in Italy
communist parties in the West received
not-so-secret Soviet funding strikes on
the Marseille waterfront and ITAT
Italian food depose that mushroomed 1946
guerrilla movements in Greece Malaya the
Philippines Vietnam Indochina the
independence of India the creation of
Pakistan and many many evil like
religious war that followed China
falling to the Communists Whittaker
Chambers is testimony implicating Alger
Hiss and others in a red Amer
in underground murderous conflict and
the dark alleys of Berlin Jan Masaryk
thrown from a window to his death by
communist secret police in
Czechoslovakia in 1948 all looked with
justice to be foaming surfaced traces of
a great red shark racing to attack
underneath in Europe by the end of 1947
about 116 million people and about five
hundred and seventy seven thousand
square miles by the under Soviet
occupation had Soviet control
governments or had been incorporated in
the Soviet Union since 1939 it was clear
that a completely new experience faced
the wars and damaged country America and
that only America could act to withstand
red imperialism what to do and how to do
it were the operating questions the maps
had not been drawn no one had written
the book on ideological war the great
game had moved outward from Central Asia
to Central Europe and America had never
played the great game before it had
neither does the desire nor the people
to be involved in the colossal civil war
in China in the 1940s its policy had
been to keep out of the entanglements of
alliance systems now it found itself in
the in alliance with allies of dubious
background stability and purpose the
United States under Truman had inherited
every enemy the Soviets had after all
there was no one else but America to
turn to after 1945 the Soviets had
intense and extensive experience of
dirty work and to the present and
America did not and to the present day
finds it very hard to accept anything
that smacks of it a Truman found that
willy-nilly his country was involved and
that some strategic direction and
control was necessary
Truman felt the only way to learn was by
doing so he did he sought resolution and
cool action rather than some great
theoretical scheme early Cold War
experienced together with the obvious
contraction of British power showed him
clearly the de Central Intelligence
Agency coupled to coordinated national
security policy making and objectives
was an ascend
you'll step to take thoughtful people
not least Truman himself were trying to
put systems in place that would at the
least enabled the United States to be
better prepared to contain shocks and
changes in less response time from 1945
to 1947 these preparations themselves
affected the shape that was to come
New Deal experience at home was applied
to the foreign front it was a time
therefore of great institutional
incubation but institutions are set up
to handle the preoccupations of the
people who set them up and it is
instructive therefore to look at what
was being done the Defense Department
National Security Council the CIA Atomic
Energy Commission Air Force Joint Chiefs
of Staff policy planning at state were
all being planned and formed
centralization and gearing for the
struggle for the struggle with the
Soviets was the double helix that bound
the new organizations together if it
wasn't for Mort Halperin the term
national security state would be a
proper description of this phase it was
after all the time of crisis and what's
wrong with emphasizing national security
in a crisis there were behind this as
well
appalling Army Navy Air Force fights in
the 1940s that cost one Secretary of
Defense and one Chief of Naval
Operations their jobs when you read
Curtis Lemay's of autobiography it
becomes apparent that his real feeling
was not against the Germans or the
Japanese or the Russians but against the
Navy the CIA his creators beginning in
many ways with Bill Donovan in the OSS
veterans fought for an agency that would
be above intra service conflict that
would be the president's and not the
brasses and that could concentrate all
the intelligence information so is
explicitly to forestall another Pearl
Harbor they set about creating a
declared civilian permanent worldwide
large-scale comprehensive intelligence
agency that came into being in 1947 with
an elite talent pool the point I shall
come back to and design to speak at the
top table with the director of Central
Intelligence functionally at cabinet
level when cabinet level meant something
Congress's role should not be
underestimated either
19:46 the House rejected proposal to
spend 1 million dollars on cancer
research but here later was perfectly
willing to spend tens of billions
establishing the agency they
understanding in relationships as dick
Elms has reminded us that then inhabited
Congress produced the votes the law and
the funds so it probably be probably be
impossible to achieve today the part
that Truman played was of enormous
importance he was far more important at
the beginning than at the end his
conviction and drive made much of the
institutionalizing happen decisive
action is never taken by committees
it was Truman there was no surrogate for
the man in the White House in 1947 he
was the only official who could make the
decision to confront the Soviets to some
degree on their own ground and that
decision is what the agency represented
Eisenhower in contrast might well have
rejected the agency reasoning that it
would be better to avoid fights that
could easily be lost Truman was the
first president since Harding to come
from Congress and Congress was not
beating at him but in 1946 the 80th
Congress had come in with a strong
Republican majority and there was a
sense that the political tide was
running against Truman and the Democrats
political observers assumed that Truman
would not win the 1948 election that
there would be a Republican president
and a return to 19 and 1919 like
situation with tariffs and a focus on
Asia the Republicans wanted a voice
Republicans hadn't been in a minority
for 15 years and so did Congress as a
whole the do-nothing good-for-nothin
80th Congress Truman called it Congress
had been left out of foreign
policymaking and some of the most
significant decisions of US government
since before Pearl Harbor no senator our
representative for example had really
known that they had voted for the
Manhattan Project the 1947 National
Security Act creating the agency the
National Security Council and the
Defense Department was a gesture to
Congress which was being told who was in
charge and was being involved into
fining who should be in charge
at the same time Congress was encouraged
to reorganize the presidential
succession with the 1947 succession act
the Speaker of the House was now placed
after the vice president in order of
succession from 1886 to 1947 the
Secretary of State and the whole cabinet
had stood between the speaker and the
presidency congressional vanity was
being placated military intelligence of
course has always been part of the
framework it's automatic the struggle at
this time was to gain political and
military acceptance of an addition to to
military intelligence giving the no more
pearl harbors cry added potency Pearl
Harbor had been a failure of military
intelligence but after 1945 it was a
cold not a hot war that was being fought
the kind of conflict that military
intelligence is simply not set up to do
it needed political types to fight it
from the start
despite appointments from the military
DC is with the exception of Hillen Cota
were political putting to work in
peacetime the special OSS skills was the
addition to the military intelligence
framework that they achieved the skills
of political analysis and micro
operational experience in securing this
achievement combating military influence
on the hill was the first success of the
OSS veterans maintaining momentum so
that the CIA was established and
maintained was their second there
compromise was actively to seek not to
attract the attention of or interference
from the military thus to the military
ranks that adorned each DCI under Truman
but the idea of the Director of Central
Intelligence as the overall coordinator
of intelligence was a dead letter before
it began the generals and admirals won
that one all the civilians on the
sidelines could not bring about a
central unity implicating the military
the agency's founding generation was
again successful espionage and
operations were always the areas that
the military and politicians would be
most sensitive about so ever so in the
agency was quiet and sophisticated OPC
in contrast formed under state auspices
collected many of the gung-ho
the two attention and campaigned for
operations they were to come into their
own after 1950 they reflected both
Truman's temperament treading on
people's toes if they were trying to
tread on his and the American desire to
do something so now I turn to the second
phase of the Truman years namely the
shaping period assured in by the Korean
War in 1950 at its start the agency was
more of a covert action organization
than an espionage one this is a
difficult point to press since the two
went very much together at the time
technical intelligence was important and
significant it inherited the wartime
achievements of magic and ultra but it
was not employing a large number of
people and its output was not voluminous
while Truman was impressed by
communications intelligence one of his
last acts as president was to create the
National Security Agency intelligence in
the Truman years was still a warm body
activity the great technical
breakthrough was Carl Nelson's
achievement in the office of
communications in 1950 when he broke the
Soviet side for encoding process but it
was not really until the development of
the u2 just outside a span that what had
been an espionage famine became a feast
this was because technical intelligence
was not so advanced in the early years
and this meant Soviets the Red Chinese
the North Koreans and so on were less
known consequently there were more pearl
harbors notably the North Korean attack
on the south in 1950 which was predicted
by no one it was too close to parallel
an enemy had massed its forces and
launched a surprise attack without the
United States being prepared it dictated
change the change was Beatle Smith his
appointment as DCI in October 1950
marked a fundamental shift in the
importance of the agency and in its
bureaucratic clout in turn this
represented a clarification of Truman's
mind general Smith was the first
absolutely first-class staff officer to
be DC I enjoyed the confidence of the
civilian and military leadership at the
highest levels
Cold War espionage espionage subversion
containing conflict in Korea needed
political types and this had also called
for Smith as a new kind of intelligence
chief he had political military
experience second only to Eisenhower's
of running a great alliance war with
Smith the agency had the director who
put it unmistakably at the top table and
gave it the force to fend off State and
the Pentagon the clarification of
Truman's mind which prompted Smith's
appointment was in step with the reality
that Korea represented as the early
1950s unfolded it was clear that the
chances of direct as opposed to in
direct conflict were less and less and
that the secret world would register
most of the indirect conflict thus
Truman considered it was suitable and
safe to promote intelligence and support
secret conflict
secretin that it was kept from Americans
that sure as hell wasn't kept from the
Soviet leadership and this is where the
move began towards operations the Korean
War argued the Soviet Union was not
going to launch a direct attack and that
direct conflicts could be limited and
contained if only at the cost of Douglas
MacArthur's career of course there had
been operations before they actually
began with Oso and Yugoslavia Italy in
France and Germany and so on and not
with OPC but old OPC believed
wholeheartedly in them on one occasion
in the fall of 1950 for example OPC
officers fired live rounds at and
kidnapped Oso people in Bangkok the Oso
guys had established that the radio
operator of Li meas forces Harold Ford
spoke about some of this yesterday was a
red agent which explained why every
foray into China was being ambushed
Leamy was an OPC operation and the OPC
people were violently reluctant to admit
that it was penetrated they thought that
if they could keep Oso his discovery
quiet by kidnapping the two as Oso radio
operators and so prevent news being sent
back to Washington that would give them
time to build a cover story that we
reflect badly upon OPC security and
vetting procedures the news still got
back the remaining Oso agents knew how
to use a radio as well
as I have already indicated covert
actions carried more weight at home than
espionage at this point
espionage had not penetrated Moscow had
not forewarned about North Korea's and
subsequently read China's plans and the
Korean War
early on showed that Cold War might be a
hot contest between two secret networks
I mentioned earlier the elite pool that
the agency drew from at its start
it should not be overstressed but it
should be noted the elite and wealthy
families that sprinkled Donovan's OSS
lent their gloss to the CIA taking the
curse off secrecy traditionally
intelligence services tend to be in the
hands of oddballs the necessary paranoia
of the profession pushes towards this
but by placing intelligence the hands of
people with a solid stake in the
Republic the creators of the agency
averted much oddball ISM a strong magnet
for the elites especially intellectual
ones was that the agency and America
were engaged in a struggle for the world
there was an enormous and exaggerated
sense of the power of social and
behavioral science were new experts and
new subjects mushroom daily the CIA
represented a vision of the management
of information which was a contemporary
social science dream it developed social
science intelligence itself a
follow-through from the OSS
incorporating analysis was the most
unusual aspect of the agency in the
early period and is a unique American
contribution to intelligence
organizations generally the agency could
and did reject military analysis from
the Pentagon that it deemed inadequate
which was a real test of its power and
authority the unsung hill encoder
deserves particular tribute on this
score it did not stop the military
getting their views across but the
agency and the DCI could prevent the
central stamp being put on them all this
in turn acted to advance intellectuals
the idea of a world struggle was an
intellectual way of looking at events
that there was a real struggle of ideas
and ideology enhanced this and the
agents agency in its early analytical
emphasis locked in people with an
intellectual perspective
journalists with with claims to reflect
of interests like the all-stock brothers
saw the struggle with the Soviets in
India in in ideological terms and were
agency channels to a wider world
Tom Braden that unlikely ambassador of
the Institute of all is to international
organizations division of the
Directorate of plans when said to me we
had a vast project targeted on the
intellectuals the battle battle for
Picasso his mind if you will the
communists sent up set up fronts which
effectively enticed the great many
particularly French intellectuals to
join we tried to set up a counter front
the radio's sport for the National
Student Association International
Student Conference the Congress of
cultural freedom for encounter Mona
proves was the result the whole
operation was an entirely natural
reflection of elite sensibilities and if
I may say probably one of the most
effective and long-lasting ones of the
earth that the agency has ever conducted
so to sum up when the agency came into
existence its job was was the struggle
for the world it was seen by
contemporaries as a clearinghouse
and it is worth noting that in the
decades that followed the Soviets always
attacked the agency for its subversion
not its espionage to outsiders covert
operations were to become the agencies
defining activity second Truman was not
a philosopher he was a problem solver he
was clear about what he did and despite
a subsequent hesitancy to acknowledge
the logic of some of his actions
operations were in tune with his
temperament he was motivated by
immediate practical concerns and did not
stand the Far Horizons he signed off on
the agency because he and the country
needed it
third the agency was a creature of its
age immediate past history of subversion
surprise attack and war was crucial to
its nature the experience and mindset of
the veterans of the OSS who campaigned
for centralized peacetime civilian
agency had a direct bearing a great
tribute to the agency's leadership over
the decades is the way that it has
changed most importantly in the 1970s
moderating itself
finding a place for secrecy in the
democracy fourth the Korean War forced a
clarification and Truman's mind that
resulted in Beatle Smith's appointment
and the agency having real clout in
Washington it also resulted in an
acceptance that the Cold War would in
part be a secret struggle between secret
organizations and this in turn spawned
operations today is de calms has
reminded us we are at what it's fair to
be another dividing gap not the end of
history but another phase just like the
late 1940s we do not today have a new
world order we have another interim
period during which we have to make up
our minds about what kind of world we
are seeking and what kind of world we
are really likely to face there are of
course of course differences between
then and now America for example is
relatively less powerful than it was 45
years ago but there was most important
contrast is one of attitudes in his
farewell speech to the agency in 1952
Truman said we are at the top and the
leader of the free world something that
we did not anticipate something that we
did not want but something that has been
forced upon us today America is
fundamentally bored with being a world
power although just as before it is
still the most authentically great one
thank you
questions
please
a hundred Kaufmann with the Woodrow
Wilson Center I wonder if mr. Helms
would elaborate a little bit on George F
Kennedy's role and whether he acted in
in an official capacity that he ever
serve as a consultant to the agency or
was he doing this as as it just as an
insider from the State Department my
recollection is and I think that John
Gaddis his biographer can probably
answer this more accurately but my
recollection of the time is that as
director of the newly founded State
Department policy planning staff Kenan
and various others who were familiar
with the Soviet Union and James
Forrestal all got together and decided
that something had to be done
about what looked very much like a
Russian takeover of Europe
yesterday the points were made about
labor of a communist labor in France
communist labor in Italy all of the
front organizations being run by the
International communist apparatus and it
was Kenan I believe who came up with the
idea that there should be an entity in
our government that was going to combat
this affront and what is more would
combat it in such a way that it would be
in keeping with decent principles of the
West and as anybody will tell you who
examines the front organizations that
the agency subsequently established
under Tom Braden and cord Meyer they
were most of them composed of the
non-communist left
Robert hi Ballmer Sears College
I believe I'm the only X FBI agent in
the group here and I'm a I'm a student
of the SIS the FB i--'s endeavors and
the Western Hemisphere during world war
ii and i wonder perhaps if the bureau's
withdrawing of its documents from latin
america was not perhaps a response to
concern they had for the security of the
sources and methods that they had
developed in latin america during the
period that they were there if you
recall there were people in the state
departments in such as lawrence duggan
during that period who was very
high-ranking official in latin america
I like I'd like your opinion on it
whether or not you think it was a matter
of spite or perhaps the bureau was
attempting to protect the people that
had cooperated with it during World War
two
I don't think there's any doubt that it
may have been a mix I think the
interpretation that you put on if I may
be so bold as that sort of the
sweetheart kiss as far as the problem
was concerned this was mr. Hoover's
excuse but I think there were many ways
in which they could have eased the
transition by helping out the
individuals who were sent down to take
over and I must say that I never during
that period of time saw any effort on
the part of the bureau to make this easy
at all so that may have been the excuse
given maybe it could be it could have
been sustained at the time there were
certainly Soviet penetrations of the
administration in Washington and there
may have been these security
considerations I have no doubt they were
but I only want to say to you that the
impression given to us by the FBI agents
who came to work for us and
so forth was that mr. Hoover was pretty
cold-hearted about the whole thing I'm
Tom powers and I've got a question for
ambassador Helms as so often you said
that you were privileged to be at the
beginning of the Cold War and there
again at the end I wonder if you could
tell us a bit about what you expected at
the beginning how did you think it would
end and what course it would take how
did the world look to you personally at
that time that is something about which
I haven't thought for some years I
frankly think that my own perception of
it was that the United States and the
West was beleaguered why was it that we
had that impression the Alta conference
which theoretically ended on a perfectly
satisfactory note turned out in the end
to be a disaster Central Europe simply
fell to the Russians they took it over
the threats in Western Europe were not
only real they were dynamic after all
when one looks back to that period we
all recognize that one of the most
useful Underground's during World War
Two in France had been the Communist
Party's underground and they were the
ones that came to the fore as soon as
the war was over and wanted to take over
not only the French labor unions but the
French government and so my my thoughts
were that at that time everything was
almost entirely defensive how are we
going to cope with this and how are we
going to deal with these various
problems and what were the mechanisms
that we could have at our disposal now
as far as I personally am concerned all
my associates and there are many of them
here in the
know that I was not the most creative
fellow in the world so I don't think
that they would have accused me of
having a great strategic concept of
where this cold war was going to come
out at that time we were fighting a
day-to-day battle almost literally day
by day and so I have to duck that if I
had the ideas I don't remember what they
were if I could ask her sorry is this on
yes this is a question it's Wesley work
University of Toronto a question for
both mr. Helms and John Ranelagh John
Ranelagh spoke of the shift from feast
to famine with the coming of the you to
another more sophisticated technological
means of intelligence gathering we heard
yesterday afternoon a counterfactual
suggestion which I found fascinating
that it might have been the case that
the Central Intelligence Agency and
other members of the US intelligence
community should have acquired these
kinds of technological means more
quickly than they in fact did and I'd be
interested in in both gentleman's
comments on whether there was indeed a
post Second World War lag in the
acquisition of technological
intelligence and if there was in other
of your senses of this what the reason
for that might have been I can only say
that if you lived through those days you
would have felt that devising an
aeroplane that was going to fly high
enough take accurate enough photographs
and come back to its starting point was
a thought that was in the minds of some
of our top scientists but the actual
performance and devising of the aircraft
certainly took some time and I don't
care very much at this late date to
belong to the what if school there are a
lot of what-ifs every day in this
community and
this world if you've done this wouldn't
have been better if you done that and
all I can say is that fortunately for
all we got those technological
achievements devised and used in plenty
of time to handle the problems that we
had
I mentioned the defectors they were most
useful at the time but I also want to
correct a certain sensations I've had in
books and magazine articles and so forth
there was something about the freedom of
the West that attracted these Soviet
defectors I only simply want to put a
fact before you and that is of all the
defectors we had during the Cold War I
don't know of a single Russian case
where the reason for the defection was
the desire for freedom and a Sat
mentality that you're facing in there in
Russia today when you think they're
going to suddenly become Democrats
because they want freedom yes um I I
speak with the tremendous advantage that
I wasn't there and therefore I have
great authority I think though that to
to echo what's been said that the that
it's all important to put one's mind
back into the cast of mind that was
operating at the time and the the whole
experience the the public experience
kristov andrew has made the point
already that the most important
experiences signals and communications
intelligence with ultra and magic and
it's and its success but that was very
very closely held it was so closely held
that many of the people were making the
budgetary decisions and so on weren't
particularly aware of it and weren't
being asked to put money into technology
technical intelligence projects the
experience had been one of human
intelligence of people being parachuted
in of guerrilla bands of marching
through jungles of
of doing daring deeds and it was only it
took time as it always does I think for
the penalty job bill Colby was I think
unnecessarily selfless graduated flag to
later II yesterday when he acknowledged
that he thought that perhaps in
retrospect more more could have been put
into technical intelligence at the time
I don't really think so I think that
what happened is what happened and no
more was likely and what happened was
remarkable well Kreisberg the Woodrow
Wilson Center
mr. Helms I wonder if you would give us
a sense I know this is going to be on
the agenda for for later today but while
we have you here after 50 years would
you give us a sense of whether there are
any or what kinds of operations or
activities of the CIA that you feel
would not be appropriate to declassify
as one reads the New York Times The
Washington Post today about plans for
millions of papers per to be
declassified
what would you not declassify
let me go to what I think is the point
of the question there was a question of
whether or not certain documents should
be declassified for this conference on
operations in France and Italy during
the period of President Truman's
administration but there's a very
important election coming up in Italy
shortly and it was felt that it would be
very undesirable to lay out what the
agency had done in Italian elections in
the end of the 40s and early 50s
certainly these things are known to
historians there is no particular secret
about them but all you have to do is
launch these papers at this particular
time it'll be headlines all over Italy
there'll be the assumption that we're
messing around and Italian politics
again and this is the kind of headache
that I think the State Department and
the White House don't have to have so I
think this question of declassification
not only has to be ad hoc if you want to
put it that way but there are still
certain things that may be known to
various of you and particularly to the
historians but they aren't necessarily
things that we need in headlines in the
modern context Ahnold bites when the
Hoover Institution mr. Helms during the
history of the CIA there were a number
of what have been called
inflicted wounds that is exposes by CIA
officers in books or magazine articles
about the quote skullduggery that the
CIA had engaged in does anybody ever
done a damage assessment to see how
serious were these expose is in terms of
the functioning of the CIA
particularly in the front door
like the Congress of cultural freedom
and other activities which were exposed
by CIA officers I honestly don't know
the answer to the question during my
term there I don't recall any such
damage assessments whether any took
place later I don't know but I can only
say that certainly those revelations are
grist to the mill whether they've done
anybody any good or not as something
else again
but in our form of democracy a secret
organization are the ones that run
secret operations has a very difficult
time of it you can put up a great wall
to protect yourself from foreigners but
we have perfectly good newspaper men in
Washington and others who get behind
that big curtain that you put up and
live next door to the case officer and
all the rest of it so that it's really
amazing that we ever carry anything off
secretly on the other hand the whole
point of the agency was to defend
freedom to defend democracy and to
defend the United States of America and
that's what it's done it's best to do I
want to make one particular comment the
agency was criticized in times past for
being too rough for being mean for doing
a lot of things of that kind you know
during World War two when a lot of us
were trained winning was everything
there wasn't any question of compromise
or anything else in World War two we the
army the Navy the Air Force and the OSS
and everybody else was out to win the
war and these niceties which we trumpet
these days in our own society were
simply let go so a bunch of the OSS
veterans who came in and others who
would serve
in the world war two were all prepared
to fight a rough war and this is what
they did in many respects so that the
turn of history made them looked nasty
whereas actually this is what they've
been trained to do I will never forget
going through the close combat course
taught by the British Colonel who had
trained the British commandos now that
those combat course was how you kill or
maim the enemy this wasn't how you win
of a fight or a boxing match or see who
won on points or anything of that kind
this was rough in other words his
counsel was that if you were in a bar
and a fight began you know pick up the
stool to protect yourself you grabbed
the nearest bottle break it off on the
edge of the bar and ran the jagged piece
into the fellows face this was the
entire approach sneaky if you possible
but when you went into combat kill him
and I want to say that this is no excuse
for maybe some of the excesses at times
but at least it partially explains how
they came into being and why they were
in the minds of the people who were
doing the work we have time for one last
question and then we'll take a break I'm
Douglas Weiner from the University of
New Hampshire
when did the polygraph machine begin it
did it begin in this gyro and it seems
interesting to note that the British and
other nation's intelligence services
have not a tradition of using the
polygraph machine as much as we do does
this tell us something about ourselves I
can't remember when the use of the
polygraph began
and since this is such a controversial
item I really don't think this is the
forum for me to try and discuss the pros
and cons of using a polygraph so if
you'll forgive me I think I'll duck that
one I'd like to thank the distinguished
panel and please adjourn to the foyer
for some light refreshments
[Applause]
next we continue our coverage of this
conference with a discussion on his
professor of political science and
director of international security
policy studies in the School of
International and public affairs at
Columbia